---
week: 2
lab: 1
lang: python
title: Files and folders
description: In this set of exercises we will explore how to use python to save data to the filesystem and load it back again.
---

{% assign challenges = site.challenges | where:"lab", 2.1 | sort: "id" %}

In this set of exercises we will explore how to use python to save and load structured data to and from files.

We will begin by looking at direct file access and move on to look at how to work with `json` file formats.
We will introduce parts of the standard python library that can help with this.
In particular, `pathlib` and `json`.

{% include toc.md %}

## Basic file IO

The most common way to interact with files in python is using the built-in [open()](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#open) function.
The `open()` function returns a file object.
File objects expose methods such as `read()` and `write()` which allow us to load and save data to the file system.

When creating a file object, we need to specify the location of the file and either read ('r') or write ('w') mode.
For example, when a file is open for read-only actions, it cannot be used to write data.

>The default read and write modes read and write strings to files.
There are other modes (e.g. for reading/writing binary data) but we can ignore these for now. 
They work in a very similar way.

### Writing to files

The following code will create a file in the current directory called *shopping.txt*.

```python
file = open('shopping.txt', 'w')
file.write("apples")
file.write("bananas")
file.write("cherries")
file.close()
```

> file paths are always relative to the location from which the code was executed.
> This is sometimes the location of the python source code.
> But code can be executed from another location.

The above code will create the file if it doesn't exist. 
It will replace any existing content in the file with the string `'applesbananascherries'`.

### Reading from files

We can read the data from a file into a programme by opening the file in read mode and calling the `read()` method.

```python
file = open('shopping.txt', 'r')
print(file.read())
file.close()
```

Following the example above, the output is as follows:

```plaintext
applesbananascherries
```

> Be careful with this.
> the `read()` method will read the entire file by default.
> If the file is larger than the available memory, you may have a problem.
>
> Optionally, you can pass a number of characters to read
> ```python
> file.read(10)
> ```
> In our example, this would read `'applesbana'`.

If the file does not exist, the code will raise a **FileNotFoundError**.

```plaintext
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "read_file.py", line 1, in <module>
    file = open('shopping.txt', 'r')
FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'shopping.txt'
```

## Context managers

When we are finished working with a file, it is important that we close it.
Python has a built in way to do this using a `context manager`.
Context managers allow us to use a `with` clause to acquire and release resources such as files.
We specify a code block to handle the resource.

So we can rewrite the above examples like this:

```python
with open('shopping.txt', 'w') as file:
    file.write("apples")
    file.write("bananas")
    file.write("cherries")
```

> This is familiar syntax, context managers are [compound statements]({{"references/compound-statements" | relative_url }}).

Notice we no longer need to close the file. 
The context manager automatically closes it when the code block ends.
It will also close the file in the event of an error.

> Always (ALWAYS) use `with` clauses to open files.

We can read our data in a similar way.

```python
with open('shopping.txt', 'r') as file:
    data = file.read()
print(data)
```

## Line-oriented files

It is very common to organise data in files using line breaks (or newline characters) as separators.
If we want to add line breaks we can simply add them into our data using the newline character `'\n'`.

```python
with open('shopping.txt', 'w') as file:
    file.write("apples\n")
    file.write("bananas\n")
    file.write("cherries\n")
```

Alternatively, we can use the `print()` method to write to a file by passing a `file` argument.

```python
with open('shopping.txt', 'w') as file:
    print("apples", file=file)
    print("bananas", file=file)
    print("cherries", file=file)
```

Notice we are not adding line breaks because the `print()` function will add the line breaks automatically by default.

>The `print()` function takes both `sep` and `end` arguments.
> The `sep` argument defines the string to use as a separator between values to be printed, and defaults to a space `' '`.
> The `end` argument defines a string to add to the end of the printed data, it defaults to `'\n'`.
>Passing in alternative values for these can be useful.
>```python
>print(1, 2, 3, sep=" + ", end=" = ")
>print(1 + 2 + 3)
>```
>```plaintext
>1 + 2 + 3 = 6
>```

Either approach produces a file which is divided into entries that can be easily extracted individually.

```plaintext
apples
bananas
cherries
```

{{ challenges[0] }}

## Reading data line-by-line

There are a number of ways to extract the data back out.

For line-delimited data we can use the `readline()` method to read one line of our file.

```python
with open('shopping.txt', 'r') as file:
    apples = file.readline()
    bananas = file.readline()
    cherries = file.readline()
print(apples)
print(bananas)
print(cherries)
```

> Notice that each line retains its newline character

This is a bit cumbersome.
Another option is to use the `readlines()` method (plural) to read the whole file contents as a list of the lines in the file.

This allows easy access to data via slicing and other sequence operations. 

```python
with open('shopping.txt', 'r') as file:
    data = file.readlines()
print(data[1]) # 'bananas\n'
```

> Passing a file object into the `list` constructor will do much the same thing.
>```python
>with open('shopping.txt', 'r') as file:
>    data = list(file)
>print(data[1]) # 'bananas\n'
>```


Alternatively, since the file objects are iterable, it can be useful to iterate directly over them.

```python
with open('shopping.txt', 'r') as file:
    for line in file:
        print(line)
```
Again, the newline characters are kept.

## Using string methods

A simple way to remove the newline characters is to load all the data from the file as a string and then call `str.split()` with a newline character as the specified separator.

```python
with open('shopping.txt', 'r') as file:
    for line in file.read().split('\n'):
        print(line)
```

Here, we use `.split('\n')` to convert our string into an array of substrings.
However, there is a problem in that if our file is empty and the `file.read()` method returns an empty string, then calling `split('\n')` will give a single item list containing one empty string.

```python
''.split('\n')
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
['']
```
{: .small-margin}

This is why the string method `splitlines()` exists.
It is specifically designed to handle line-oriented data from a file.
It will produce an empty list in the event of an empty file.

```python
''.splitlines()
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
[]
```
{: .small-margin}

We can use it like this.

```python
with open('shopping.txt', 'r') as file:
    for line in file.read().splitlines():
        print(line)
```

Here the file `read()` method returns the complete string contents of the files with newline characters intact and the `splitlines()` method divides the string into a list of lines with the newline delimiters removed.

```plaintext
apples
bananas
cherries
```

> Note that again, this will load the entire file so, for very large files, it may not be an appropriate approach.

{{ challenges[1] }}

## Making things easier with `pathlib`

You should usually consider using built-in module [pathlib](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html) when you need to work with files and folders, simply because it makes things neater and easier.

>Because `pathlib` is relatively new (it was introduced in 2014 with python 3.4), you will still find lots of example code online that use the older approaches above.
It can take years for new approaches to gain in popularity
Many python users still do not know that `pathlib` exists.
Because of course, the old ways still work.

### Path objects

The core of `pathlib` is the `Path` class.
The `Path` class allows us to create path *instances*, objects that represent individual paths.
That is, objects that represent the locations of files and folders in the filesystem.

Instances of the `Path` class are created by passing folder and file names into the `Path` constructor.

```python
from pathlib import Path

my_path = Path('folder1', 'folder2', 'filename.txt')
```

Depending on your platform, this will either generate an instance of the `PosixPath` class (linux/mac) or the `WindowsPath` class (windows).
Both classes have the same set of useful properties and methods which can be used to inspect and manipulate the filesystem.

The path naively represents the folders and the filename we provided as a relative path from the current working directory (i.e. the location from which the script is executed).

```python
print(my_path)
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
PosixPath('folder1/folder2/filename.txt')
```
{: .small-margin}
>You may get a different result, depending on your platform.

### Creating absolute paths

We can also use the `Path.absolute()` method to return a new `Path` object with the absolute path rather than the relative path.

```python
print(my_path.absolute())
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
PosixPath('/home/graeme/Teaching/GAMR1520/folder1/folder2/filename.txt')
```
{: .small-margin}
>Again, your result will look different, but should make sense to you.

### Checking if a path exists

Notice that the path points to a file (and folder structure) that does not exist.
We can check to see if the file exists using [Path.exists()](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#pathlib.Path.exists).

```python
print(my_path.exists())
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
False
```
{: .small-margin}

### Creating files and folders

We can create the missing folders and the file using [Path.mkdir()](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#pathlib.Path.mkdir) and [Path.touch()](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#pathlib.Path.touch).

```python
my_path.mkdir(parents=True)
my_path.touch()
print(my_path.exists)
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
True
```
{: .small-margin}

You should see the folders and file have been created.

>Both `mkdir()` and `touch` will actually fail if the folders do exist.
Passing `exist_ok=True` into both of them will suppress the error.
See the [Path.mkdir](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#pathlib.Path.mkdir)  and [Path.touch](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#pathlib.Path.touch) documentation for details.

If our path exists, we can also test to see if we are pointing at a folder or a file.

```python
print(my_path.is_dir())
print(my_path.is_file())
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
False
True
```
{: .small-margin}

### Directory listings

If we are pointing at a folder, we can list the contents using [Path.iterdir()](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#pathlib.Path.iterdir).
This will iterate over the contents of the folder and return a `Path` object for each file or folder it finds.

Consider a path object pointing to the current working directory (`'.'`).

```python
from pathlib import Path

here = Path('.')
for p in here.iterdir():
    if p.is_dir():
        print(str(p).ljust(20), "(folder)", sep="\t")
    if p.is_file():
        print(str(p).ljust(20), "(file)", sep="\t")
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
shopping.txt        (file)
list.txt            (file)
string.txt          (file)
folder1             (folder)
my_experiments      (folder)
script.py           (file)
```
{: .small-margin}

Drilling down into subdirectories is perfectly possible.

### Reading and writing data

`Path` objects have access to the `Path.open()` method which is virtually identical to the builtin `open()` function except it obviously doesn't need a filename/path to be provided.

```python
my_path = Path('shopping.txt')
with my_path.open('r') as my_file:
    data = my_file.read().splitlines()
```

### Joining paths

Often we want to programmatically determine the path to a file.
We can join paths using the [Path.joinpath()](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pathlib.html#pathlib.PurePath.joinpath) method.

```python
root = Path('folder')
my_path = root.joinpath('filename.txt')
```

Alternatively, we can use the slash operator (`/`) to join paths.
This is equivalent to the above.

```python
root = Path('folder')
my_path = root / 'filename.txt'
```

Though all of these were possible before `pathlib` was introduced, using the `os` module (and in particular `os.path`), they tended to produce somewhat messy code.
The object-oriented interface provided by `pathlib` makes working with paths simple and intuitive.

```python
from pathlib import Path

root = Path('my_lists')
root.mkdir(exist_ok=True)

shopping = ['apples', 'bananas', 'cherries']

name = input('Enter a name for the list:\n>>> ')
my_file = root / f'{name}.txt'

with my_file.open('w') as f:
    for item in shopping:
        print(item, file=f)
```

The above code creates a folder called `'my_lists'` (if it doesn't already exist).
It then asks the user to provide a name for the list.
It then creates a file in the `'my_lists'` folder with the given name.
The beauty of this is that the code automatically handles the filesystem semantics of different operating systems.
This code will work on linux, mac and windows, producing the appropriate directory structure.

>Code using the new `pathlib` module is simpler and more *pythonic*.

{{ challenges[2] }}

## JSON data

[Javascript Object Notation](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) is a very simple and very common, human-readable data format for transferring data between systems.

Essentially, the json format maps onto the core python data types, numbers, strings and booleans as well as dictionaries and lists.

Python provides the [built-in json module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/json.html) for generating/handling json data.
To use json, we first need to import the module.

> Start a new file for this

```python
import json
```

Let's also create a nested python data structure, anything will do. 

> Add this to your file

```python
saved_game = {
    "health": 82,
    "attack": 21,
    "shield": 5,
    "magic": 76,
    "speed": 45,
    "inventory": [
        {
            "name": "blue potion", 
            "type": "health", 
            "power": 6
        },
        {
            "name": "massive sword", 
            "type": "weapon", 
            "power": 9
        }
    ],
    "check-point": 84
}
```

### Generating and reading JSON strings

It's possible to work directly with JSON strings using `json.loads()` and `json.dumps()`.

The following code uses `json.dumps()` to convert our dictionary into a json string.

```python
my_json = json.dumps(saved_game)
print(my_json)
```

> You should be extending your file, you will need the `import` statement and the `saved_game` assignment to a dictionary literal (as above) in your script for this to work.

The string output contains the same data in json format.

```json
{"health": 82, "attack": 21, "shield": 5, "magic": 76, "speed": 45, "inventory": [{"name": "blue potion", "type": "health", "power": 6}, {"name": "massive sword", "type": "weapon", "power": 9}], "check-point": 84}
```

You will notice, the output is very similar to the python syntax.
The main difference is that the quotes are now all double.

> There are some more significant differences, for example, json objects (equivalent to dictionaries) can only have string keys so if we use e.g. numeric keys, they will be converted to strings.
> If we use more complex objects as keys (e.g. tuples) then the conversion will fail with a TypeError.

For convenience, we can pass formatting parameters such as `indent` to `json.dumps()`.

```python
my_json = json.dumps(saved_game, indent=2)
print(my_json)
```

>Again, this is missing the import and the dictionary literal.
Hopefully its clear what you need to do.
You just need to add the `indent=2` argument.

This produces a much more readable string with newline characters and spaces for indentation.

```json
{
  "health": 82,
  "attack": 21,
  "shield": 5,
  "magic": 76,
  "speed": 45,
  "inventory": [
    {
      "name": "blue potion",
      "type": "health",
      "power": 6
    },
    {
      "name": "massive sword",
      "type": "weapon",
      "power": 9
    }
  ],
  "check-point": 84
}
```

If we want to load data from a `json` string we can use `json.loads()`.

```python
import json

my_json_string = '{"some_key": "some value", "another_key": 1000}'
my_dictionary = json.loads(my_json_string)
print(my_dictionary)
print(type(my_dictionary))
print(type(my_dictionary["another_key"]))
```

The output shows the string has been converted to a python dictionary and the integer has been properly identified (as it has no quotes in the string).

```plaintext
{'some_key': 'some value', 'another_key': 1000}
<class 'dict'>
<class 'int'>
```

### Writing to a file

We can use the `json.dump()` method to write the result to a file.
The same `indent` parameter is also an option here.

> That's `json.dump()`, not `json.dumps()` (which means dump to a string).


```python
from pathlib import Path
import json

path = Path("saved_game.json")

with path.open('w') as f:
    json.dump(saved_game, f, indent=2)
```

Reading the json data back out from our file is also very simple.

```python
from pathlib import Path
import json

path = Path("saved_game.json")

with path.open('r') as f:
    my_dict = json.load(f)
print(my_dict)
```

JSON provides a very convenient way to store complex data and is an excellent data interchange format between programmes, whether they are written in python or any other language.


## Comma separated values (CSV)

JSON is very flexible and allows for complex, nested data structures to be easily saved and restored.
However, if the data are simpler, or can be transformed into a simple grid of values, then CSV might be a better choice.

Imagine a dataset like this.

```python
animals = [{'name': 'Anteater', 'description': 'Eats ants'},
           {'name': 'Bear', 'description': 'Grizzly'},
           {'name': 'Chimp', 'description': 'Chump'},
           {'name': 'Dog', 'description': 'Friend'}]
```
{: .small-margin}

We could save it as simple JSON (`'animals.json'`). 

```python
from pathlib import Path
import json

animals = [{'name': 'Anteater', 'description': 'Eats ants'},
           {'name': 'Bear', 'description': 'Grizzly'},
           {'name': 'Chimp', 'description': 'Chump'},
           {'name': 'Dog', 'description': 'Friend'}]

path = Path('animals.json')

with path.open('w') as file:
    json.dump(animals, file, indent=2)
```
{: .small-margin}
```json
[
  {
    "name": "Anteater",
    "description": "Eats ants"
  },
  {
    "name": "Bear",
    "description": "Grizzly"
  },
  {
    "name": "Chimp",
    "description": "Chump"
  },
  {
    "name": "Dog",
    "description": "Friend"
  }
]
```
{: .small-margin}


Notice that the JSON format wastes a lot of space because of the repetition of keys.

> The strings `"name"` and `"description"` are repeated for each *record*.

We could save a lot of space by converting it to comma separated values, e.g. `'animals.csv'`. 

```plaintext
name,description
Anteater,Eats ants
Bear,Grizzly
Chimp,Chump
Dog,Friend
```
{: .small-margin}

Now the first row contains the column names and the data are much more compact.
The file is still human-readable and also, the CSV formatted data can be opened as a spreadsheet.


### The `csv` module

The [csv module](https://docs.python.org/3/library/csv.html) takes some getting used to, but is really very simple.
To write data we can use a [csv.DictWriter](https://docs.python.org/3/library/csv.html#csv.DictWriter) object.

> It's also possible to use a simpler [csv.Writer](https://docs.python.org/3/library/csv.html#writer-objects) object with slightly less convenience.

```python
from pathlib import Path
from csv import DictWriter

animals = [{'name': 'Anteater', 'description': 'Eats ants'},
           {'name': 'Bear', 'description': 'Grizzly'},
           {'name': 'Chimp', 'description': 'Chump'},
           {'name': 'Dog', 'description': 'Friend'}]

path = Path('animals.csv')

with path.open('w') as file:
    writer = DictWriter(file, fieldnames=['name', 'description'])
    writer.writeheader()
    writer.writerows(animals)
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
name,description
Anteater,Eats ants
Bear,Grizzly
Chimp,Chump
Dog,Friend
```
{: .small-margin}

> Notice we write the CSV header row before we write all the data.


## Converting between formats

Say you need to read from a JSON file and write into a CSV file.
We can use one `with` clause to open both files and ensure both are closed.

The conversion is simple, it requires both `json.load()` and a `csv.DictWriter` object.


```python
from pathlib import Path 
from csv import DictReader
import json

inpath = Path('animals.json')
outpath = Path('animals_from_json.csv')

with inpath.open('r') as infile, outpath.open('w') as outfile:
    animals = json.load(infile)
    writer = DictWriter(outfile, fieldnames=['name', 'description'])
    writer.writeheader()
    writer.writerows(animals)
```

The code here is doing a fairly complex job but *with some care* the code can be made extremely clear. 

Converting in the other direction requires a `csv.DictReader` object and `json.dump()`.

> Notice the `csv.DictReader` object will use the header row to determine the field names.
Also, because it's iterable, we can just pass it into `list()` to load all the data.


```python
from pathlib import Path 
from csv import DictReader
import json

inpath = Path('animals.csv')
outpath = Path('animals_from_csv.json')

with inpath.open('r') as infile, outpath.open('w') as outfile:
    animals = list(DictReader(infile))
    json.dump(animals, outfile, indent=2)
```

Again, a seemingly complex task can be specified in eight lines of code.

In a real world scenario it is likely that the data would require processing between input files and output files.
The best way to do this is to use [functions]({{ "references/functions" | relative_url }}).
We will learn about functions in [the next set of exercises]({{ "exercises/2.2" | relative_url }}).
