---
week: 3
lab: 1
lang: python
title: Object-oriented python
description: This exercise introduces object-oriented programming in python. We will develop very simple classes and explore the complexities and benefits of this approach. 
---

{% assign challenges = site.challenges | where:"lab", 3.1 | sort: "id" %}

In this set of exercises we will introduce the `class` keyword and explore *dunder* methods such as `__init__()` and `__str__` as well as the *instance* argument (`self`) which is implicitly passed to class methods.

{% include toc.md %}

## Classes are type definitions

Remember that all values are objects and that all objects have a *type*.
For example, `'hello'` and `[1, 2, 3]` are values.
`'hello'` is an instance of the `str` type.
`[1, 2, 3]` is an instance of the `list` type. 

<figure>
    <div class="mermaid">
    flowchart TD;
        subgraph types ["Types"]
            list
            str
            int
        end
        subgraph instances [Instances]
            hello["'hello'"]
            world["'world'"]
            listA["[1, 2, 3]"]
            listB["['a', 'b', 'c']"]
            listC["[2.2, 'hello', 4]"]
            1
            2
        end
        1 --> int
        2 --> int
        hello --> str
        world --> str
        listA --> list
        listB --> list
        listC --> list
    </div>
</figure>

The *type* of a value will determine what kind of things it can do.
For example, a `list` like `[1, 2, 3]` will have an `append()` method.
Whereas a `str` like `'hello'` will have an `upper()` method.

*Classes* in python are definitions of new data types from which we can create instances.
Our starting point will look like this:

```python
class MyClass:
    pass
```

> For an empty class the `pass` keyword is necessary to avoid an IndentationError in the compound statement.
It literally does nothing but represent an empty code block.

The code above is a compound statement using the `class` keyword containing only the (capitalised) name of our `MyClass` class.
This is how classes are defined.

We can now refer directly to the `MyClass` class, for example, we can print it.

```python
class MyClass:
    pass

print(MyClass)
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
<class '__main__.MyClass'>
```
{: .small-margin}

The output shows the default representation for a `MyClass` instance indicating that the class is defined in the `__main__` module.

> In python *the file you execute* is known as the `__main__` module.
> Double underscores indicate that `__main__` is part of the python infrastructure.

We create an *instance* of our `MyClass` class like this.

```python
class MyClass:
    pass

my_instance = MyClass()
```

It's very important to be clear on the difference between a *class* and an *instance*.
It should become clear with practice.

> The parentheses indicate we are *calling* our class.
In fact, we are calling the class *constructor* method which can be used to customise our instances.
This is **really important** and we will talk about it a lot later.
For now, we will concentrate on the class itself.

If we print the instance, we can see it is a `MyClass` object.
We can also pass our instance to the `type()` function, just like with any value.

```python
class MyClass:
    pass

my_instance = MyClass()

print(my_instance)
print(type(my_instance))
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
<__main__.MyClass object at 0x7f4f03e60280>
<class '__main__.MyClass'>
```
{: .small-margin}

We can see that our `my_instance` variable points to an object which has the type `MyClass`.

> This is the default representation, we shall see later that we can customise how our types are represented.
>
> You can check that the location of the object is the same as it's `id` like this.
> ```python
> print(f'{id(my_instance):#x}')
> ```
> {: .small-margin}
> ```plaintext
> 0x7f4f03e60280
> ```
> {: .small-margin}
> Notice the same number is included when we print the instance.


## Attributes

In practice, classes are a way of organising code into *namespaces* containing *attributes*.
We can assign *attributes* to our class using *dot notation*.

```python
class MyClass:
    pass

# Using dot notation
MyClass.apples = 'hello'  # setting an attribute on the class

# more dot notation
print(MyClass.apples)     # This is found and printed
print(MyClass.bananas)    # This will raise an error
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
hello
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "path/to/simple_attributes.py", line 9, in <module>
    print(MyClass.bananas)    # This will raise an error
AttributeError: type object 'MyClass' has no attribute 'bananas'
```
{: .small-margin}

The first print statement works fine but the second raises an `AttributeError` because the attribute `MyClass.bananas` was not found.

The `MyClass.apples` attribute is not a normal variable.
It is defined within the *namespace* provided by the class.
It can only be accessed via the class (and, as we shall see, via it's instances).

> Python modules (i.e. files) are also *namespaces* in the same way.
> Its essentially a mechanism for avoiding name clashes across modules and classes.

### Instance attributes

Instances are also *namespaces*, a lot like classes.
However, there is one major difference.
Instances can access attributes from their class.

If an attribute is not found on an instance, it will be looked up on the class.
In this way, classes provide attributes that are shared across all instances.

```python
class MyClass:
    pass

# create instances
my_instance = MyClass()
another_instance = MyClass()

# Set some attributes on the class and an instance
MyClass.apples = 'hello'
my_instance.apples = 'different value'
my_instance.bananas = 123

# Make sure you follow this
print(my_instance.apples)       # found on the instance
print(my_instance.bananas)      # found on the instance
print(another_instance.apples)  # found on the class
print(another_instance.bananas) # not found on either
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
different value
123
hello
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "path/to/instance_attributes.py", line 17, in <module>
    print(another_instance.bananas) # not found on either
AttributeError: 'MyClass' object has no attribute 'bananas'
```

> Notice the output includes three printed values followed by an error.
An `AttributeError` is raised because the `another_instance.bananas` attribute is not defined on the instance and is not defined on the class.

### Default attributes

Classes can have attributes included in their definition. 
Anything we put inside the code block will be part of the class definition and will be available to all instances of the class.

> Remember that naming things in a meaningful way helps to make our code easy to read and understand.
Our `MyClass` example is a bit pointless.
We need to define something meaningful.

We will create a `class` to represent a coordinate, i.e. a 2-dimensional (x, y) location on a plane.
Our `Coordinate` class will be very simple. 
It will define two numerical values, `x` and `y`.

Classes can be defined with attributes like this:

```python
class Coordinate:
    x = 0
    y = 0
```

Adding attributes like this into the class definition provides us with default values or constants that individual instances can optionally override.
We can access the class-level attributes using dot notation as usual and they provide default values for our instances.

```python
class Coordinate:
    x = 0
    y = 0

c1 = Coordinate()
c2 = Coordinate()

c1.x = 2
c2.y = -3

print(f"{c1.x=}, {c1.y=}")
print(f"{c2.x=}, {c2.y=}")
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
c1.x=2, c1.y=0
c2.x=0, c2.y=-3
```
{: .small-margin}


> Remember, when we try to access an attribute on an *instance*, if the attribute is not found, then the *class* will be checked.

The problem here is that every instance of our coordinate class is created with the same initial values for `x` and `y`.
To avoid this issue, we need to define a custom *constructor* method.

### Methods

A function defined within a class is known as a method.
As we have seen, functions in python have a type and are just like any other data (though they are executable).

> See [defining custom functions]({{"references/functions#defining-custom-functions" | relative_url}}) for a reminder

```python
def my_function():
    pass

print(my_function)
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
<function my_function at 0x7f8e5a766680>
```
{: .small-margin}

Functions defined inside class definitions are known as *methods*.
We can define a method within our `Coordinate` class.

```python
class Coordinate:
    x = 0
    y = 0

    def my_method():
        pass

print(Coordinate.my_method)
```
{: .small-margin}

```plaintext
<function Coordinate.my_method at 0x7f8e5a7660e0>
```
{: .small-margin}

There is one main difference from *normal* functions when we define custom methods on a class.
**When called from an instance, a method will automatically receive a copy of the instance as the first argument.**

> This is crucial, and is best explained with some examples.

What happens when we try to call `Coordinate.my_method()` from an instance?

```python
class Coordinate:
    x = 0
    y = 0

    def my_method():
        pass

c1 = Coordinate()
c1.my_method()
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
TypeError: Coordinate.my_method() takes 0 positional arguments but 1 was given
```
{: .small-margin}

> This is unexpected, so this must be important.
Pay attention.

The error is telling us that the method *"takes 0 positional arguments"*.

> We can agree with this much, because we did not specify any arguments.

However, it goes on to say *"but 1 was given"*.

So apparently our method was passed one argument, even though we passed nothing when we called it.

```python
c1.my_method()  # We passed no arguments in this line
```

This extra argument is a reference to the instance `c1`.
It is automatically added when we call a method attribute *from an instance* using dot notation.

Let's update our code to have a look at the argument.
We'll make two instances to see the impact.

> Notice the `my_method()` function now takes one argument (`arg`) and prints it. 

```python
class Coordinate:
    x = 0
    y = 0

    def my_method(arg):
        print(arg)

c1 = Coordinate()
c2 = Coordinate()

c1.my_method()
c2.my_method()
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
<__main__.Coordinate object at 0x7fc3e3cd0310>
<__main__.Coordinate object at 0x7fc3e3cd02e0>
```
{: .small-margin}

The code no longer raises an error because we are handling the single argument that was passed automatically.
The output is showing us that we are printing the two `Coordinate` instances.
We can see that the two instances are *different* (because they have different locations in memory).

This is a core mechanism of classes and instances in python, *all methods on a class* automatically receive a copy of the instance as an additional first argument when called from an instance using dot notation (e.g. `c1.my_method()`).

By convention, python programmers *always* name this argument `self` to avoid confusion.

> What this means is that every method defined on a class should add `self` as the first argument.
>
> The above code is for demonstration purposes only.
*Never* use a different variable name for this.
*Always use `self`*. 
>
> So every method can use `self` to access and modify the instance attributes.

All subsequent arguments are treated as with normal functions.

```python
class Coordinate:
    x = 0
    y = 0

    def my_method(self, *args, **kwargs):
        print(args, kwargs)


c1 = Coordinate()
c2 = Coordinate()

c1.my_method(1, 2, 3)
c2.my_method(hello='world')
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
(1, 2, 3) {}
() {'hello': 'world'}
```
{: .small-margin}

The advantage of this is that methods all have access to instance attributes (including other methods).
This allows for methods that modify our instance data.

Here's an example of a method `Coordinate.invert()` that swaps the values of `x` and `y`.

```python
class Coordinate:
    x = 0
    y = 0

    def invert(self):
        self.x, self.y = self.y, self.x


c1 = Coordinate()
c1.x = 10
c1.y = 5

print(c1.x, c1.y)
c1.invert()
print(c1.x, c1.y)
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
10 5
5 10
```
{: .small-margin}

We can see how this would be useful.
We can define classes with methods which describe how to manage their instance data.

## Class constructors

Notice that above we are setting the instance attributes manually after we create the instance.

```python
c1 = Coordinate()
c1.x = 10
c1.y = 5
```

> This is very awkward and annoying. 
Taking three lines of code to create our simple object.
This could be done with simple variables just as easily.
It makes us wonder, what is the point of classes?

We want to define a custom *constructor* method to allow this, more convenient syntax.

```python
c1 = Coordinate(10, 5)
```

> This would be better, capturing the two literal values in one line of code to create a single object containing both values as attributes.
But it won't work automatically.

Trying this produces a reasonable error.

```plaintext
TypeError: Coordinate() takes no arguments
```

Our constructor method will need to allocate the provided arguments to the `x` and `y` attributes.
So far, there is no way for it to know how to do this automatically.

All classes define a *constructor* method called `__init__`, which does nothing by default.
When we create an instance of a class, we are implicitly calling this `__init__` method.

Our class can be rewritten with a custom `__init__` method to allow the more convenient syntax.
Our new *constructor* takes the automatic `self` argument plus two more arguments, `x`, and `y`.

> We no longer need the class attributes `x` and `y` since all our instances will define them directly on `self`.

```python
class Coordinate:
    def __init__(self, x, y):
        self.x = x
        self.y = y

    def invert(self):
        self.x, self.y = self.y, self.x
```

Inside the class definition we have added a new `__init__` method.
Python automatically recognises functions with this name as the *constructor* for the class.

When we create new instances of our `Coordinate` class, python automatically calls `__init__` with a fresh instance as the first argument.
We can now pass in arguments for `x` and `y` like this.

```python
origin = Coordinate(0, 0)
c1 = Coordinate(3, 8)
c2 = Coordinate(-4, 2)

print(f'({origin.x}, {origin.y})')
print(f'({c1.x}, {c1.y})')
print(f'({c2.x}, {c2.y})')
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
(0, 0)
(3, 8)
(-4, 2)
```
{: .small-margin}

We can see our instances have been initialised with the `x` and `y` values (e.g. `0` and `0` in the first example).
These correspond to the `x` and `y` arguments of the `__init__` method.
Inside the body of the method, we are setting attributes `self.x` and `self.y`.

## Changing how instances are displayed

When we call `print()` on `Coordinate` instances, we get output like this. 

```python
origin = Coordinate(0, 0)
print(origin)
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
<__main__.Coordinate object at 0x7fec1d6d4280>
```
{: .small-margin}

The `print()` function automatically calls `str()` on anything is is asked to print.

> The terminal can *only* display strings.
> This is also why `input` always returns a string.

We can see that passing any object into the `str()` constructor will generate a string representation of that object.

```python
print([str(i) for i in (1.1, True, Coordinate(0, 0))])
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
['1.1', 'True', '<__main__.Coordinate object at 0x7fabd3cafc10>']
```
{: .small-margin}

> Wait... how does the `str()` function know how to convert my custom object into a string?

The `str()` constructor will call the `__str__` *method* of any object which is passed to it.

> Remember, everything is an object.

The object's `__str__` method must return a string representation of the object.

> Think about this...

Anything can be converted to a string and anything can be passed into the `print()` method because all classes have a default `__str__` method.

We can demonstrate this by simply calling the `__str__` method on some objects, they all have one.

```python
print([i.__str__() for i in (1.1, True, Coordinate(0, 0))])
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
['1.1', 'True', '<__main__.Coordinate object at 0x7fabd3cafc10>']
```
{: .small-margin}

> Note this is `i.__str__()`, not `str(i)`.
But they are equivalent because `str(i)` calls `i.__str__()`.

This is really nice for us as developers.
Our objects are responsible for telling the `str()` constructor what a string representation should be.
So, we can define how our classes are converted into strings.

The default `__str__` implementation is something like this:
 ```python
def __str__(self):
    md = self.__class__.__module__
    cls = self.__class__.__name__
    return f"<{md}.{cls} object at {id(self):#x}>"
```
It provides enough information to work out what something is and where it is defined, but its not very convenient if we want to see the instance attributes of our `Coordinate`.

We can give our class a customised `__str__` method to return a customised string.

```python
class Coordinate:
    def __init__(self, x, y):
        self.x = x
        self.y = y

    def invert(self):
        self.x, self.y = self.y, self.x

    def __str__(self):
        return f'({self.x}, {self.y})'

for x in range(3):
    for y in range(3):
        print(Coordinate(x, y))
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
(0, 0)
(0, 1)
(0, 2)
(1, 0)
(1, 1)
(1, 2)
(2, 0)
(2, 1)
(2, 2)
```
{: .small-margin}

Now anywhere we print a `Coordinate` instance, it will be appear as a pair of numbers in brackets.

### The `__repr__` method

There is a related method `__repr__` which is very similar to `__str__` but is intended to produce a more explicit string representation of an object that indicates the type as well as the values of instance attributes.
Just as the built-in `str()` function calls `__str__`, there is a similar built-in `repr()` function which will call `__repr__` and return the resulting string.

> You can think of `__str__` as returning a *user-friendly* representation whilst `__repr__` returns a *developer-friendly* representation. 

If we implement this then we can add some more context to the string.

```python
class Coordinate:
    def __init__(self, x, y):
        self.x = x
        self.y = y

    def invert(self):
        self.x, self.y = self.y, self.x

    def __str__(self):
        return f'({self.x}, {self.y})'

    def __repr__(self):
        return f"Coordinate(x={self.x}, y={self.y})"


for x in range(3):
    for y in range(3):
        print(repr(Coordinate(x, y)))
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
Coordinate(x=0, y=0)
Coordinate(x=0, y=1)
Coordinate(x=0, y=2)
Coordinate(x=1, y=0)
Coordinate(x=1, y=1)
Coordinate(x=1, y=2)
Coordinate(x=2, y=0)
Coordinate(x=2, y=1)
Coordinate(x=2, y=2)
```
{: .small-margin}

The output shows a more explicit representation of our object (which could otherwise be confused with a tuple).

> We have followed the convention of *representing* our instances as the code that would create them.
> This works nicely for simple classes, though sometimes it can be useful to use a different approach.

This can also be generated within an f-string using the `!r` formatting.

```python
for x in range(3):
    for y in range(3):
        print(f"{Coordinate(x, y)!r}")
```

> The above code produces the same result


## Operators

The exact same idea is used to implement operators.

Consider this simple expression.

```python
a - b
```

Python actually interprets expressions like this as function calls.

```python
a.__sub__(b)
```

> In python, the above two examples are exactly equivalent.

Obviously, the first one is a neater way of doing it and is always preferred when we want to do subtraction.
The key point here is that our `Coordinate` object can define how it interacts with operators.
Currently, it cannot be part of a subtraction operation.

```python
a = Coordinate(1, 2)
b = Coordinate(2, 1)

a - b
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "path/to/coordinate.py", line 15, in <module>
    a - b
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for -: 'Coordinate' and 'Coordinate'
```

But, we can implement a `Coordinate.__sub__(self, other)` method to define how our instances interact. 
It will take the usual `self` argument (`a` in this case), plus a second argument `other` which will be the second operand in the expression (`b` in this case).

Again, examples should make it clear what is happening.
In this case we can define a method that returns a new `Coordinate` instance with calculated `x` and `y` values.

```python
class Coordinate:
    def __init__(self, x, y):
        self.x = x
        self.y = y

    def invert(self):
        self.x, self.y = self.y, self.x

    def __sub__(self, other):
        return Coordinate(self.x - other.x, self.y - other.y)

    def __str__(self):
        return f'Coordinate({self.x}, {self.y})'

    def __repr__(self):
        return f"Coordinate(x={self.x}, y={self.y})"

c1 = Coordinate(1, 2)
c2 = Coordinate(3, 4)
c3 = c1 - c2

print(f"{c1} - {c2} = {c3}")
```
{: .small-margin}
```plaintext
(1, 2) - (3, 4) = (-2, -2)
```
{: .small-margin}

We can implement addition, multiplication, division etc. in the same way using `__mul__`, `__add__`, `__truediv__` and [many other special methods](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#emulating-numeric-types) which each correspond to a specific operator.


{{ challenges[0] }}

Instances of our new type can be passed around and used in our programmes just like any value now.

{{ challenges[2] }}


Our `Coordinate` class returns new instances from methods such as `__add__` and `__sub__`.
If we wanted to develop a more efficient and fully mutable object, we need to `return self` in these methods after making a modification in order to yield the modified instance which (depending on the details) can be more efficient that generating a whole new instance.

We can also implement augmented addition (`+=`) and subtraction (`-=`) with [`__iadd__` and `__isub__`](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__iadd__).
These will also usually need to mutate the instance and `return self`.

{{ challenges[1] }}




