---
lab: 3.3
title: Implement load and save
lang: python
---

Try to implement automated load and save functionality so that the programme automatically saves the list to a specified file on shutdown and loads the data from the same file when the programme starts.

### Hints

There are a few important things to think about

- Store a `pathlib.Path` object as a class attribute for convenience.
- Specify a default filename but allow the calling code to use a custom value when creating a `ShoppingList` instance.
- Implement `load` and `save` methods to actually do the work of writing and reading from the file.
- Trigger your `load` method from within the `__init__` method.
- Be very careful when triggering your `save` method.

Your `save` method can be triggered in this way from within the `__init__` method.
```python
self.protocol("WM_DELETE_WINDOW", self.save_and_exit)
```
The above ensures that when the window manager close button is clicked to close the window, the method `save_and_exit` will be triggered.

Where the `save_and_exit` method looks something like this.
```python
def save_and_exit(self):
    self.save()
    self.destroy()
```
You need to be **very careful** about this because if you don't destroy the window in this method then you will have no way to close the programme.

- The `save` method will need to use `self.list.get(0, tk.END)` to extract a list from the listbox widget.
- Given a list `items`, the `load` method can call `self.list.insert(0, *items)` to load them into the listbox widget.

