---
lab: 5.1
title: A script of your own
lang: js
---

1. Experiment with creating some JavaScript code of your own, linked into a *scripts.js* file.
Do some silly things, write stuff into the console.

1. Try to use javascript to remove an element from the DOM.

> This will require research - look it up on [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/remove).

Once you are satisfied, try the following:

```js
const data = [
    {title: "this is a title", description: "Here is some text"},
    {title: "this is another title", description: "It can be any text"},
    {title: "a third title", description: "It doesn't really matter"},
    {title: "title four", description: "It's just for demonstration purposes"}
]
```
Start with the above array of objects.
Write a script that loops over the array, creating an `<article>` element for each object.

Within each `<article>` element, append an `<h2>` element with the `title` property as content and a `<p>` element with the description as content.
Append each `<article>` into the document body.

You should end up with something like this:

```html
<body>
    <article>
        <h2>this is a title<h2>
        <p>Here is some text"</p>
    </article>
    <article>
        <h2>this is another title<h2>
        <p>It can be any text"</p>
    </article>
    <article>
        <h2>a third title<h2>
        <p>It doesn't really matter"</p>
    </article>
    <article>
        <h2>title four<h2>
        <p>It's just for demonstration purposes</p>
    </article>
</body>
```

Again, try to cause errors and understand what the error means.
We haven't covered everything, so you (or someone nearby) will have to work out how to do it.

Trying and getting it wrong is only the first step in the process.
It's extremely important that you identify the problems with your approach and solve them through *research*.
This is what coding is all about.

If anything strange happens, ask someone (this is research).
Your lab tutor can help (asking them is also research).
If you get completely stuck, bring your question to the next lecture (research, obvs).

> Remember, we are all learning together and we may not know the precise answer but we can certainly help you to research the answer.